



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                          October 30, 2017
Expires: May 3, 2018


      Tools for the Support of Network Virtualization and Slicing
            draft-arkko-arch-virtualization-and-slicing-tech

Abstract

   Network virtualization or slicing is network management pertaining to
   treating different traffic categories in separate virtual networks,
   with independent resource, technology, and topology choices.  This
   document reviews IETF technologies that can be useful for network
   virtualization, such as those in Internet, Routing, and OPS areas.

   An understanding of what current technologies there exist and what
   they can or cannot do is the first step in developing plans for
   possible extensions.  Nevertheless, it should be noted from the
   outset that there is a considerable toolset for at leas some of the
   tasks associated with virtualization or slicing.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 3, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Arkko                      Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Virtualization and Slicing           October 2017


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Recommendations for Further Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   Network virtualization is network management pertaining to treating
   different traffic categories in separate virtual networks, with
   independent resource, technology, and topology choices.  Network
   function virtualization is defined in Wikipedia as follows:

      "Network function virtualization or NFV is a network architecture
      concept that uses the technologies of IT virtualization to
      virtualize entire classes of network node functions into building
      blocks that may connect, or chain together, to create
      communication services.

      NFV relies upon, but differs from, traditional server-
      virtualization techniques, such as those used in enterprise IT.  A
      virtualized network function, or VNF, may consist of one or more
      virtual machines running different software and processes, on top
      of standard high-volume servers, switches and storage devices, or
      even cloud computing infrastructure, instead of having custom
      hardware appliances for each network function."

   The related term slicing has been used to describe a virtualization
   concept in planned 5G networks.

   Many of the necessary tools for using virtualization are software,
   e.g., tools that enable running processes or entire machines in a
   virtual environment decoupled from physical machines and isolated
   from each other, virtual switches that connect systems together,
   management tools to set up virtual environments, and so on.  From a
   communications perspective these tools operate largely in the same
   fashion as their real-world counterparts do, except that there may
   not be wires or other physical communication channels, and that
   connections can be made in the desired fashion.



Arkko                      Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Virtualization and Slicing           October 2017


   In general, there is no reason for protocols to change just because a
   function or a connection exists on a virtual platform.  However,
   sometimes there are useful underlying technologies that facilitiate
   connection to virtualized systems, or optimised or additional tools
   that are needed in the the virtualized environment.

   For instance, many underlying technologies enable virtualization at
   hardware or physical networking level.  For instance, Ethernet
   networks have Virtual LAN (VLAN) tags and mobile networks have a
   choice of Access Point Names (APNs).  These techniques allow users
   and traffic to be put on specific networks, which in turn may
   comprise of virtual components.

   Other examples of protocols providing helpful techniques include
   virtual private networking mechanisms or management mechanisms and
   data models that can assist in setting up and administering
   virtualized systems.

   An interesting architectural trend is that virtualization and data/
   software driven networking technologies are driving network
   architectures where functionality moves towards central entities such
   as various controllers, path computation servers, and orchestration
   systems.

   This document reviews IETF technologies that can be useful for
   network virtualization.

   An understanding of what current technologies there exist and what
   they can or cannot do is the first step in developing plans for
   possible extensions.  Nevertheless, it should be noted from the
   outset that there is a considerable toolset for at least some of the
   tasks associated with virtualization or slicing.

   ...

2.  Recommendations for Further Work

   ...

3.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Gonzalo Camarillo, Joel Halpern, Jeff
   Tantsura, Gabriel Montenegro and many others for interesting
   discussions in this problem space.

4.  Informative References

   [I-D.flinck-slicing-management]



Arkko                      Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Virtualization and Slicing           October 2017


              Flinck, H., Sartori, C., Andriannov, A., Mannweiler, C.,
              and N. Sprecher, "Network Slicing Management and
              Orchestration", draft-flinck-slicing-management-00 (work
              in progress), July 2017.

   [I-D.galis-netslices-revised-problem-statement]
              Galis, A., "Network Slicing - Revised Problem Statement",
              draft-galis-netslices-revised-problem-statement-01 (work
              in progress), July 2017.

   [I-D.geng-coms-problem-statement]
              67, 4., Slawomir, S., Qiang, L., Matsushima, S., Galis,
              A., and L. Contreras, "Problem Statement of Supervised
              Heterogeneous Network Slicing", draft-geng-coms-problem-
              statement-00 (work in progress), September 2017.

   [I-D.geng-netslices-architecture]
              67, 4., Dong, J., Bryant, S., kiran.makhijani@huawei.com,
              k., Galis, A., Foy, X., and S. Kuklinski, "Network Slicing
              Architecture", draft-geng-netslices-architecture-02 (work
              in progress), July 2017.

   [I-D.king-teas-applicability-actn-slicing]
              King, D. and Y. Lee, "Applicability of Abstraction and
              Control of Traffic Engineered Networks (ACTN) to Network
              Slicing", draft-king-teas-applicability-actn-slicing-01
              (work in progress), July 2017.

   [I-D.netslices-usecases]
              kiran.makhijani@huawei.com, k., Qin, J., Ravindran, R.,
              67, 4., Qiang, L., Peng, S., Foy, X., Rahman, A., Galis,
              A., and G. Fioccola, "Network Slicing Use Cases: Network
              Customization and Differentiated Services", draft-
              netslices-usecases-02 (work in progress), October 2017.

   [I-D.qiang-coms-netslicing-information-model]
              Qiang, L., Galis, A., 67, 4., kiran.makhijani@huawei.com,
              k., Martinez-Julia, P., and H. Flinck, "Technology
              Independent Information Model for Network Slicing", draft-
              qiang-coms-netslicing-information-model-00 (work in
              progress), September 2017.

   [I-D.qiang-netslices-gap-analysis]
              Qiang, L., Martinez-Julia, P., 67, 4., Dong, J.,
              kiran.makhijani@huawei.com, k., Galis, A., Hares, S., and
              S. Slawomir, "Gap Analysis for Transport Network Slicing",
              draft-qiang-netslices-gap-analysis-01 (work in progress),
              July 2017.



Arkko                      Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Virtualization and Slicing           October 2017


   [RFC6824]  Ford, A., Raiciu, C., Handley, M., and O. Bonaventure,
              "TCP Extensions for Multipath Operation with Multiple
              Addresses", RFC 6824, DOI 10.17487/RFC6824, January 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6824>.

Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Kauniainen  02700
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net






































Arkko                      Expires May 3, 2018                  [Page 5]
