



Internet Engineering Task Force                                 J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                              October 2017
Expires: April 4, 2018


          Considerations on Network Virtualization and Slicing
                    draft-arkko-arch-virtualization

Abstract

   Network virtualization is network management pertaining to treating
   different traffic categories in separate virtual networks, with
   independent resource, technology, and topology choices.

   This document makes some observations on the effects virtualization
   on Internet architecture.  A further revision of this document will
   also provide a summary of IETF technologies that relate to network
   virtualization.  An understanding of what current technologies there
   exist and what they can or cannot do is the first step in developing
   plans for possible extensions.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 4, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  General Observations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Overview of IETF Virtualization Technologies  . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Lower layers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Traffic Separation in VPNs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.3.  Traffic Engineering and QoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.4.  Service Chaining  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.5.  Management Frameworks and Data Models . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Architectural Observations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Further Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Network virtualization is network management pertaining to treating
   different traffic categories in separate virtual networks, with
   independent resource, technology, and topology choices.

   This document makes some observations on the effects virtualization
   on Internet architecture.

   A further revision of this document will also provide a summary of
   IETF technologies that relate to network virtualization.  An
   understanding of what current technologies there exist and what they
   can or cannot do is the first step in developing plans for possible
   extensions.

   In particular, whether one calls a particular piece of technology
   "virtualization", "slicing", "separation", or "network selection"
   does not matter at the level of a system.  Any modern system will use
   several underlying technology components that may use different terms
   but provide some separation or management.  So, for instance, in a
   given system you may use VLAN tags in an ethernet segment, MPLS or
   VPNs across the domain, NAIs to select the right AAA instance, and
   run all this top of virtualized operating system and software-based
   switches.  As new needs are being recognised in the developing
   virtualization technology, what should drive the work is the need for



Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


   specific capabilities rather than the need to distinghuish a
   particular term from another term.

2.  Definitions

   Network function virtualization is defined in Wikipedia as follows:

      "Network function virtualization or NFV is a network architecture
      concept that uses the technologies of IT virtualization to
      virtualize entire classes of network node functions into building
      blocks that may connect, or chain together, to create
      communication services.

      NFV relies upon, but differs from, traditional server-
      virtualization techniques, such as those used in enterprise IT.  A
      virtualized network function, or VNF, may consist of one or more
      virtual machines running different software and processes, on top
      of standard high-volume servers, switches and storage devices, or
      even cloud computing infrastructure, instead of having custom
      hardware appliances for each network function."

   The related term slicing has been used to describe a virtualization
   concept in planned 5G networks.  The 3GPP architecture specification
   [TS-3GPP.23.501] defines network slices as having potentially
   different "supported features and network functions optimisations",
   and spanning functions from core network to radio access networks.

   [I-D.king-teas-applicability-actn-slicing] defined slicing as "an
   approach to network operations that builds on the concept of network
   abstraction to provide programmability, flexibility, and modularity.
   It may use techniques such as Software Defined Networking (SDN) and
   Network Function Virtualization (NFV) to create multiple logical
   (virtual) networks, each tailored for a set of services that are
   sharing the same set of requirements, on top of a common network.

3.  General Observations

   Software vs. Protocols

      Many of the necessary tools for using virtualization are software,
      e.g., tools that enable running processes or entire machines in a
      virtual environment decoupled from physical machines and isolated
      from each other, virtual switches that connect systems together,
      management tools to set up virtual environments, and so on.  From
      a communications perspective these tools operate largely in the
      same fashion as their real-world counterparts do, except that
      there may not be wires or other physical communication channels,
      and that connections can be made in the desired fashion.



Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


      In general, there is no reason for protocols to change just
      because a function or a connection exists on a virtual platform.
      However, sometimes there are useful underlying technologies that
      facilitiate connection to virtualized systems, or optimised or
      additional tools that are needed in the the virtualized
      environment.

      For instance, many underlying technologies enable virtualization
      at hardware or physical networking level.  For instance, Ethernet
      networks have Virtual LAN (VLAN) tags and mobile networks have a
      choice of Access Point Names (APNs).  These techniques allow users
      and traffic to be put on specific networks, which in turn may
      comprise of virtual components.

      Other examples of protocols providing helpful techniques include
      virtual private networking mechanisms or management mechanisms and
      data models that can assist in setting up and administering
      virtualized systems.

4.  Overview of IETF Virtualization Technologies

   General networking protocols are largely agnostic to virtualization.
   TCP/IP does not care whether it runs on a physical wire or on a
   computer-created connection between virtual devices.

   As a result, virtualization generally does not affect TCP/IP itself
   or applications running on top.  There are some exceptions, though,
   such as when the need to virtualize has caused previously held
   assumptions to break, and the Internet community has had to provide
   new solutions.  For instance, early versions of the HTTP protocol
   assumed a single host served a single website.  The advent of virtual
   hosting and pressure to not use large numbers of IPv4 addresses lead
   to HTTP 1.1 adopting virtual hosting, where the identified web host
   is indicated inside the HTTP protocol rather than inferred from the
   reception of a request at particular IP address [VirtualHosting]
   [RFC2616].

   But where virtualization affects the Internet architecture and
   implementations is at lower layers, the physical and MAC layers, the
   systems that deal with the delivery of IP packets to the right
   destination, management frameworks controlling these systems, and
   data models designed to help the creation, monitoring, or management
   of virtualized services.

   What follows is an overview of existing technologies and technologies
   currently under development that support virtualization in its
   various forms.




Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


4.1.  Lower layers

   Technologies for that assist separation and engineering of networks
   at L2 ... client and tunnel identification, AAA, EAP, IKEv2 ...

4.2.  Traffic Separation in VPNs

   Technologies for that assist separation and engineering of networks:
   ... provider-based VPNs ... GRE and other tunnels ... secure tunnels
   ... MPLS ... segment routing ...

4.3.  Traffic Engineering and QoS

   Technologies for that assist separation and engineering of networks:
   ... at L2 ... VPNs ... MPLS ... segment routing ... traffic
   engineering and TEAS ... data models ...

   The TEAS working group works on enhancements to traffic-engineering
   capabilities for MPLS and GMPLS networks:

      Traffic Engineering (TE) is the term used to refer to techniques
      that enable operators to control how specific traffic flows are
      treated within their networks.  TE is applied to packet networks
      via MPLS TE tunnels and LSPs.  The MPLS-TE control plane was
      generalized to additionally support non-packet technologies via
      GMPLS.  RSVP-TE is the signaling protocol used for both MPLS-TE
      and GMPLS.

      The TEAS WG is responsible for:

      *  Traffic-engineering architectures for generic applicability
         across packet and non-packet networks.

      *  Definition of protocol-independent metrics and parameters.

      *  Functional specification of extensions for routing (OSPF,
         ISIS), for path computation (PCE), and RSVP-TE to provide
         general enablers of traffic-engineering systems.

      *  Definition of control plane mechanisms and extensions to allow
         the setup and maintenance of TE paths and TE tunnels that span
         multiple domains and/or switching technologies.









Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


4.4.  Service Chaining

   The SFC working group has defined the concept of Service Chaining:

      Today, common deployment models have service functions inserted on
      the data-forwarding path between communicating peers.  Going
      forward, however, there is a need to move to a different model,
      where service functions, whether physical or virtualized, are not
      required to reside on the direct data path and traffic is instead
      steered through required service functions, wherever they are
      deployed.

      For a given service, the abstracted view of the required service
      functions and the order in which they are to be applied is called
      a Service Function Chain (SFC).  An SFC is instantiated through
      selection of specific service function instances on specific
      network nodes to form a service graph: this is called a Service
      Function Path (SFP).  The service functions may be applied at any
      layer within the network protocol stack (network layer, transport
      layer, application layer, etc.).

4.5.  Management Frameworks and Data Models

   Management tools: ... data models ...

   There have been two working groups at the IETF, focusing on data
   models describing VPNs.  The IETF and the industry in general is
   currently specifying a set of YANG models for network element and
   protocol configuration [RFC6020].  A service model is an abstract
   model, at a higher level than network element or protocol
   configuration.  A service model for VPN service describes a VPN in a
   manner that a customer of the VPN service would see it.

   It needs to be clearly understood that such a service model is not a
   configuration model.  That is, it does not provide details for
   configuring network elements or protocols: that work is expected to
   be carried out in other protocol-specific working groups.  Instead,
   service models contain the characteristics of the service as
   discussed between the operators and their customers.  A separate
   process is responsible for mapping this customer service model onto
   the protocols and network elements depending on how the network
   operator chooses to realise the service.

   The L2SM WG specifies a service model for L2-based VPNs:

      The Layer Two Virtual Private Network Service Model (L2SM) working
      group is a short-lived WG.  It is tasked to create a YANG data
      model that describes a L2VPN service (a L2VPN customer service



Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


      model).  The model can be used for communication between customers
      and network operators, and to provide input to automated control
      and configuration applications.

      It is recognized that it would be beneficial to have a common base
      model that addresses multiple popular L2VPN service types.  The
      working group derives a single data model that includes support
      for the following:

      *  point-to-point Virtual Private Wire Services (VPWS),

      *  multipoint Virtual Private LAN services (VPLS) that use LDP-
         signaled Pseudowires,

      *  multipoint Virtual Private LAN services (VPLS) that use a
         Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) control plane as described in
         [RFC4761] and [RFC6624],

      *  Ethernet VPNs specified in [RFC7432].

      Other L2VPN service types may be included if there is consensus in
      the working group.

   Similarly, the L3SM WG specified a sevice model for L3-based VPNs.

      The Layer Three Virtual Private Network Service Model (L3SM)
      working group is a short-lived WG tasked to create a YANG data
      model that describes a L3VPN service (a L3VPN service model) that
      can be used for communication between customers and network
      operators, and to provide input to automated control and
      configuration applications.

      It needs to be clearly understood that this L3VPN service model is
      not an L3VPN configuration model.  That is, it does not provide
      details for configuring network elements or protocols.  Instead it
      contains the characteristics of the service.

5.  Architectural Observations

   Role of Software

      ...

   Centralization of Functions

      An interesting architectural trend is that virtualization and data
      /software driven networking technologies are driving network
      architectures where functionality moves towards central entities



Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


      such as various controllers, path computation servers, and
      orchestration systems.

      A natural consequence of this is the simplification (and perhaps
      commoditization) of network elements, while the "intelligent" or
      higher value functions migrate to the center.

      The benefits are largely in the manageability, control, and speed
      of change.  There are, however, potential pitfalls to be aware of
      as well.  First off, networks need to continue to be operate even
      under partial connectivity situations and breakage, and it is key
      that designs can handle those situations as well.

      And it is important that network users and peers continue to be
      able to operate and connect in the distributed, voluntary manner
      that we have today.  Today's virtualization technology is
      primarily used to manage single administrative domains and to
      offer specific service to others.  One could imagine centralised
      models being taken too far as well, limiting the ability of other
      network owners to manage their own networks.

   Tailored vs. general-purpose networking

      The interest in building tailored solutions, tailored Quality-of-
      Service offerings vs. building general-purpose "low touch"
      networks seems to fluctuate over time.

      It is important to find the right balance here.  From an economics
      perspective, it may not be feasible to provide specialised service
      -- at least if it requires human effort -- for large fraction of
      use cases.  Even if those are very useful in critical
      applications.

6.  Further Work

   There may be needs for further work in this area at the IETF.  Before
   discussing the specific needs, it may be useful to classify the types
   of useful work that might come to question.  And perhaps also outline
   some types of work that is not appropriate for the IETF.

   The IETF works primarily on protocols, but in many cases also with
   data models that help manage systems, as well as operational guidance
   documents.  But the IETF does not work on software, such as
   abstractions that only need to exist inside computers or ones that do
   not have an effect on protocols either on real or simulated "wires".

   The IETF also does not generally work on system-level design.  IETF
   is best at designing components, not putting those components



Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


   together to achieve a particular purpose or build a specific
   application.

   As a result, IETF's work on new systems employing virtualization
   techniques (such as 5G slicing concept) is more at the component
   improvement level than at the level of the concept.  There needs to
   be a mapping between a vision of a system and how it utilizes various
   software, hardware, and protocol tools to achieve the particular
   virtualization capabilities it needs to.  Developing a new concept
   does not necessarily mean that entirely new solutions are needed
   throughtout the stack.  Indeed, systems and concepts are usually
   built on top of solid, well defined components such as the ones
   produced by the IETF.

   That mapping work is necessarily something that those who want to
   achieve some new functionality need to do; it is difficult for others
   to take a position on what the new functionality is.  But at the same
   time, IETF working groups and participants typically have a
   perspective on how their technology should develop and be extended.
   Those two viewpoints must meet.

   The kinds of potential new work in this space falls generally in the
   following classes:

   Virtualization selectors

      Sometimes protocols need mechanisms that make it possible to use
      them as multiple instances.  E.g., VLAN tags were added to
      Ethernet frames, NAIs were added to PPP and EAP, and so on.  These
      cases are rare today, because most protocols and mechanisms have
      some kind of selector that can be used to run multiple instances
      or connect to multiple different networks.

   Traffic engineering

      A big reason for building specific networks for specific purposes
      is to provide an engineered service level on delay and other
      factors to the given customer.  There are a number of different
      tools in the IETF to help manage and engineer networks, but it is
      also an area that continues to develop and will likely see new
      functionality.

   Virtual service data models

      Data models -- such as those described by L2SM or L3SM working
      groups can represent a "service" offered by a network, a setup
      built for a specific customer or purpose.




Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


7.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank Gonzalo Camarillo, Joel Halpern, Jeff
   Tantsura, Gabriel Montenegro, Alex Galis, Adrian Farrell, Yi Zhao,
   Hannu Flinck, and many others for interesting discussions in this
   problem space.

8.  Informative References

   [CC2015]   claffy, kc. and D. Clark, "Adding Enhanced Services to the
              Internet: Lessons from History", September 2015 (https://
              www.caida.org/publications/papers/2015/
              adding_enhanced_services_internet/
              adding_enhanced_services_internet.pdf).

   [I-D.ietf-sfc-nsh]
              Quinn, P., Elzur, U., and C. Pignataro, "Network Service
              Header (NSH)", draft-ietf-sfc-nsh-28 (work in progress),
              November 2017.

   [I-D.king-teas-applicability-actn-slicing]
              King, D. and Y. Lee, "Applicability of Abstraction and
              Control of Traffic Engineered Networks (ACTN) to Network
              Slicing", draft-king-teas-applicability-actn-slicing-01
              (work in progress), July 2017.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC2616, June 1999, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
              rfc2616>.

   [RFC4761]  Kompella, K., Ed. and Y. Rekhter, Ed., "Virtual Private
              LAN Service (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and
              Signaling", RFC 4761, DOI 10.17487/RFC4761, January 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4761>.

   [RFC6020]  Bjorklund, M., Ed., "YANG - A Data Modeling Language for
              the Network Configuration Protocol (NETCONF)", RFC 6020,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6020, October 2010, <https://www.rfc-
              editor.org/info/rfc6020>.

   [RFC6624]  Kompella, K., Kothari, B., and R. Cherukuri, "Layer 2
              Virtual Private Networks Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and
              Signaling", RFC 6624, DOI 10.17487/RFC6624, May 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6624>.





Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Network Virtualization             October 2017


   [RFC7432]  Sajassi, A., Ed., Aggarwal, R., Bitar, N., Isaac, A.,
              Uttaro, J., Drake, J., and W. Henderickx, "BGP MPLS-Based
              Ethernet VPN", RFC 7432, DOI 10.17487/RFC7432, February
              2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7432>.

   [RFC8049]  Litkowski, S., Tomotaki, L., and K. Ogaki, "YANG Data
              Model for L3VPN Service Delivery", RFC 8049, DOI 10.17487/
              RFC8049, February 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/
              rfc8049>.

   [TS-3GPP.23.501]
              3GPP, "3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical
              Specification Group Services and System Aspects; System
              Architecture for the 5G System; Stage 2 (Release 15)",
              3GPP Technical Specification 23.501, July 2017.

   [VirtualHosting]
              Wikipedia, "Virtual Hosting", Wikipedia article https://
              en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_hosting, August 2017.

Author's Address

   Jari Arkko
   Ericsson
   Kauniainen  02700
   Finland

   Email: jari.arkko@piuha.net























Arkko                     Expires April 4, 2018                [Page 11]
